---
layout: post
title: "League\\Csv 7 is out"
date: "2015-02-19"
categories: 
  - "web"
tags: 
  - "csv"
  - "speed"
  - "thephpleague"
---

[League\\Csv 7 ](https://github.com/thephpleague/csv/tree/7.0.0/CHANGELOG.md "League\Csv changelog") has been officially released! The new version is as simple and as powerful as before but adds more speed and flexibility to the package. Features introduced during the version 6.0 series are now stabilized and care was taken to improved the package manipulation of huge CSV files.

Installing `League\Csv 7` using composer is as simple as typing the code below in your composer installed box.

\[prism field=snippet\_csv\_composer language=javascript\]

This should install/update your composer powered project to the latest stable version of the library.

- View the documentation at [http://csv.thephpleague.com](http://csv.thephpleague.com "League\Csv documentation")
- View the source and contribute at [https://github.com/thephpleague/csv](https://github.com/thephpleague/csv "League\Csv source code on Github")

## What is League\\Csv ?

For those non familiar with the library, it's a set of two classes `League\Csv\Reader` and `League\Csv\Writer` that make it painless to interact with CSV documents if your are using a supported version of PHP. Let's say you have some CSV data that you want to import into your database. `League\Csv\Reader` will help you do that as simple as possible with the following code:

\[prism field=snippet\_csv\_each language=php\]

More examples and usage can be found in [the examples directory](https://github.com/thephpleague/csv/tree/7.0.0/examples "League\Csv usage examples") attached to the library on the github repository.

## What's changed ?

**Mac OS X users will now be required to update their PHP ini setting to allow the library to work as intended on their environment**.

Since version 5.3 the `auto_detecting_line_ending` PHP ini setting was activated by default by the library. The problem is that the library was messing with the developer environment without informing him which could lead to unexpected side effects without warning. By removing this setting, the developer gains back the full control over his environment.

\[prism field=snippet\_csv\_ini\_setting language=php\]

**The Writer class has been rewritten to be faster and more flexible.**

Previous version of the `League\Csv\Writer` class performed, out of the box, a number of validation and formatting that were slowing down row insertions. To solve this issue while still being able to control/manipulate the inserted data version 7.0 introduce a new flexible mechanism illustrate below

\[prism field=snippet\_csv\_formatter\_validatiors language=php\]

You can of course attach as many filters as you want. But keep in mind that more filters means slower data insertion.

This is a major departure from previous versions and the migration guide will provide all the information needed to migrate your code if necessary.

**You can no longer use classes default constructor to instantiated them. You are required to use one of the 3 named constructors.**

[Using named constructors](http://csv.thephpleague.com/instantiation/ "How to instantiate League\Csv objects") is the recommended way to instantiate the `Writer` and the `Reader` objects since version 6. We are now taking the next logical step to remove remaining ambiguities when creating a `League\Csv` object by  removing the default constructor from public API.

**Conversion methods output can now be modified using the `League\Csv\Reader` query options**

Conversion methods that transform your CSV into `JSON`, `XML` or `HTML` were introduced in the package prior to the `League\Csv\Reader` query options. As such they were restricted to work on the full CSV document only. Starting with version 7.0, a backward compatibility break is introduced to enable these methods to be more flexible [when used with the Reader](http://csv.thephpleague.com/upgrading/7.0/#csv-conversion-methods "Csv conversion methods are more flexible").

\[prism field=snippet\_csv\_output language=php\]

Do keep in mind though, that the same restrictions to the use of query options still remain.

**The `detectDelimiterList` method now returns the delimiter and its occurrence in the selected rows.**

This method introduced in the last version returned an `array` containing the founded delimiters ordered by their occurrences but the occurrence information was not given. With this backward compatibility break the information is now available to the developer.

\[prism field=snippet\_csv\_delimiterlist language=php\]

## Upgrading to League\\Csv 7

Even thought this package introduces many backward compatibility breaks. I'm confident that upgrading to `League\Csv` 7 won't require changes for most users. For a full list of the changes please refer to the [CHANGELOG.md](https://github.com/thephpleague/csv/tree/7.0.0/CHANGELOG.md "League\Csv changelog") file attached to the library and see [the upgrading guide](http://csv.thephpleague.com/upgrading/7.0/ "Upgrading from 6.0 to 7.0") for more information.

## Last but not least

The `League\Csv` is an open source project with a MIT License so contributions are more than welcome and will be fully credited.  These contributions can be anything from reporting an issue, requesting or adding missing features or simply improving or correcting some typo on the documentation website.
